---
title: Using Should Politely
description: How to use should naturally and politely.
category: english-guide
permalink: /english/should
---

Should is one of the most misused words by non-native speakers and can instantly make your language sound rude, condescending or just plain unnatural.

## Where to Not Use Should

**Giving directions**

Let's say a recruiter needs to tell a candidate how to find the office:

[0.a] `*`&nbsp;*You should take the metro to our office.*

[1.a] `*`&nbsp;*You should get off at Kontraktova Ploshcha.*

Instead, give raw information and reasons:

[0.b] *We don't have a lot of parking near the office, so it is easier to take the metro.*

[1.b] *Kontraktova Ploshcha is the closest metro station*

**Procedures**

[2.a] `*`&nbsp;*I should pass the exam to get a driver's license*

In this case there is no choice. If I don't pass the exam, there's no way I'll get a license. *Supposed to*, *ought to* and *should* all carry a sense of choice, whereas *must*, *have to* and *need to* show that there is no choice.

[2.b] *I need to pass the exam to get a driver's license.*

**Requests***

If something is a request, don't use should.

[3.a] `*`&nbsp;*You should call me back by the end of the week.*

This sounds like a command. A more neutral sounding request would be:

[3.b] *Could you call me back by the end of the week?*

You can add a reason to make the request more urgent:

[3.c] *Please let me know by the end of the week so I can process your order on time.*

## How to Use Should

**Predictions**

The most common place to properly use should is with predictions. This is part of the larger system of  [evidentiality in English][0].

[4.a] *It should snow tomorrow.*

[4.b] *It's a bit too warm; it shouldn't snow tomorrow.*

[5.a] *I should be on time, since traffic isn't bad.*

Sentence [5.a] usually wouldn't be negated. Instead:

[5.b] *Traffic is bad today; I'm (going to / will) be late.*

**Impersonal Obligations**

While I'd avoid using *should* for a personal obligation, it is useful to talk about more general social obligations. The first person singular is often used:

[6.a] *We should consider alternatives to our current strategy.*

It's still possible to not use *should* in this context:

[6.b] *Let's look at some alternatives to our current strategy.*

When you is used, make sure it is the [impersonal you][1]. This can be tricky in English as context is the only way to distinguish these, whereas in other languages, such as German, the difference is marked:

[7.a.de] *Du sollst deine Hausaufgaben machen.*

[7.b.de] *Man soll seine Hausaufgaben machen.*

We can translate this impersonally as:

[7.b.en] *You should do your homework.*

**Personal Advice**

This is a danger zone and using should here often comes off rather rude. While we could use *should*, it would best be reserved for a parent or teacher scolding a child.

[7.a.en.1] *Please do your homework.*

It's even better to use a conditional for personal advice:

[7.a.en.2] *You'll remember the material better if you do the homework.*

**Questions**

Yes or no questions can be asked using should.

[8.a] *Should I open the window?*

Another structure that works just as well:

[8.b] *Would you like me to open the window?*

**Regrets**

[9] *I should have eaten breakfast this morning.*

[10] *My friend shouldn't have traveled to Asia, because he got very sick.*

## Conclusion

*Should* can be tricky to use without sounding a bit rude. In most cases, you are better off avoiding it altogether. The imperative plus please is perfectly polite. *Could you* also works for requests.

If you do use should, stick to the first person or third person. It's best to use the general you instead of a personal you with should.

The best advice is to observe how native speakers use modal verbs. Pick a podcast or blog post that uses the word and analyze how it is used. Adopt the same usage yourself.

[0]: /english/modal-verbs-probability-inference
[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generic_you
