---
title: Yes and No
description: How to avoid confusion when answering yes or no.
category: english-guide
permalink: /english/yes-and-no
---

Saying yes and no is surprisingly difficult in English, and I've seen many misunderstandings between native-speakers and non-native-speakers.

*Let's go out for dinner tonight.      
Don't we have food at home?   
Yes / No*  

I don't know about you, but I have no idea what either yes or no mean here. This example shows why many languages (including English!) don't actually use a two-form affirmation / negation system. English used to have a four-form system:  

*Do we have any food at home?* [positive question]  
*Yea* [affirmative] / *Nay* [negative]  
*Don't we have food at home?* [negative question]  
*Yes* [we have food at home]  
*No* [we don't have food at home]  

Yea and nay survive in the modern English as [fossilized forms][0], so they don't help clear up the yes or no problem in modern English.

German has a three-form system:

*Haben wir Essen zu Hause?*  
*Ja / Nein* [as in English]  
*Haben wir kein Essen zu Hause?*  
*Doch* [we have food at home]  
*Nein* [we don't have food at home]

Chinese doesn't have the words yes and no at all; an [echo answer][1] is used:

我们在家有食物吗? [positive question]  
有 [literally: have]  
没有 [literally: not have]   

Turning it into a negative question makes no difference in the clarity of the answer:  
我们在家没有食物吗? [negative question]    
有 [literally: have]  
没有 [literally: not have]

In fact, the most common way to ask the question in Chinese is to use both the negative and positive form, from which the echo answer logically flows:    
我们在家有没有食物?  
[literally: We at home have don't have food?]  

Spoken English makes extensive use of echo answers in addition to and sometimes in place of yes or no. This is likely a [borrowing from the Celtic languages][2] that were present in Britain before the arrival of Germanic speakers.

The issue brought up in the first example would unlikely occur between two native-speakers. A native-speaker would respond:
*Don't we have food at home?* [negative question]  
*Yes, we do.*    
*No, we don't.*  

Hence, my advice for non-native speakers is to <u>always</u> use an echo response with negative questions. In general, use them to add emphasis or make your speech sound more natural and understandable.

[0]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fossilization_%28linguistics%29
[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Echo_answer
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brittonicisms_in_English
