---
title: "Now: Life goes on, even in lockdown"
description: "Life goes on, even in lockdown."
permalink: /now/2020-03-20
category: now
---

I’m in full lockdown mode due to COVID-19. Remote work has been an adjustment (more positive than negative), and I’m happy to have a stable and secure job. I definitely don’t have the issue of too much time on my hands. 

That means I’ll be in Kyiv for the foreseeable future with no travel plans. 

### Pet Projects 

- Doing a complete redesign of my site ([details](/redesign)).  
- Switching from a Mac to an iPad for my main computing device. It’s doable, but it requires thinking in a different paradigm. 
- Getting back into bodyweight fitness and jumping rope for obvious reasons. 


### Reading 

I’m making sure I don’t get sucked into the black hole of news and social media about coronavirus. I’m staying informed, but not going overboard. 

I’m reading the book *[Make Time](https://maketime.blog)*. So far it’s the best productivity / time management book I’ve ever read&thinsp;—&thinsp;and I’ve read far too many.

Instead of being pie in the sky productivity porn, this has a realistic system and actionable tips for people working in typical big companies (aka *Busy Bandwagon*). This is definitely getting a full blog post once I’m done and have used the system for a few months.  

### Listening 

It’s cheesy, but I just downloaded *Sandstorm* by Dana Al Fardan. She composed the boarding music for Qatar Airways, so I associate her with travel. Given the quarantine, it’s nice to think of somewhere a bit further from home. 

I really like the sound of her music. It has an exotic flair while still being very listenable to a Western ear. It’s lovely both to listen to by itself in the evening or as background music for work. 